our next speaker uh is a luminary Bay
Area artist ranu Mukerji who makes
hybrid work in painting film performance
and installation to expand imaginative
capacities she is also co-founder of the
artist Avatar orphan drift along with
longtime collaborator Maggie Roberts uh
artist Avatar orphan drift emerged in
the mid1 1990s in London and their Works
in video collage installation and in
Publications such as the Epic book cyber
positive
um presently foreshadowed uh the coming
reconfiguring of Social and perceptual
space via the nent Internet uh orphan
drift has drift has explored the
boundaries of machine and human Vision
since taking diverse forms working and
collaborating across knowledge systems
and shifting aristic strategies in
accordance with the changing ex uh
exigencies of the time uh ranu is was
recently appointed the dean of film and
video at Cal arts and her work has been
the subject of solo shows at the D Young
Museum the Art Museum the San Jose
Museum of Art um and orphan drift also
has had solo shows right here in SF at
telematic Gallery uh take it away Ru
thank you so
[Applause]
much hi everybody thanks gray area for
having me thanks for the
introduction um so I'm here today to
introduce you to a project by the artist
Avatar orphan drift um I've been co-
channeling that as as Wade mentioned
since
1994 so we started this work when the
internet was born or was just coming
into the social realm and um and since
then we've worked at this pace that's
kind of unconventional in like
professional linear terms so you know
after about 10 years which at which that
was my solo practice and then its
members kind of scattered across the
globe and um made things over long
stretches of time and then I think when
the more recent era of this rapid
technological transformation through
machine learning sort of started to
Bubble Up orphan drift also started to
kind of reconfigure into what it is now
and so we're g to I'm going to talk
today I'm G to play a video that um
we'll start playing in a bit um that
just takes you I'm basically going to do
a bit like a studio visit in a really um
informal way in this formal setting um
about this one project and
recently we did an interview with the
artist Ido ridon for Koda which is
c0da which is a re research project and
Publishing platform conceived by the
artist Katrine Meyer in um in Berlin and
it deals with feminist modes of coding
and writing so there's a whole interview
about our whole history um which was
really exciting to do because it made me
really reflect on the differences
between the time that we came up in and
what's going on right now um and that
interview will be up on the Koda it's
coda.org in early
November the project I'm going to talk
about today is called Nine brains and
that is a project about um it came out
of a long time investigating the idea of
the biological and behavioral Tendencies
of the octopus as a potential model for
alternative ways of thinking about
through Notions of intelligence
interspecies
Communications machine learning and our
relationship with the natural world and
prior or during nine brains there was
also a project called isre um which was
a partnership with a machine learning
company called EIC lab in the UK and the
artist Stephanie Moran um my
collaborator Maggie Roberts Alistair mil
um who was a a fellow here and spent a
lot of time in residency here um and in
conversation with Ava jger at the
serpentine creative AI lab so that was a
project where we actually were going to
try to have um uh an AI trained by an
octopus without human goals and so our
idea was like how can we have this sort
of exchange happen between the AI and
the octopus and not be in the way um and
the project ended up being a really
speculative one partially because the
funding needed to do that to to make an
actual testing
apparatus which we designed and figured
out was just kind of beyond our ability
um but we learned a lot of things about
that there's going to be on the
serpentine creative Ali lab the project
is now like this website that's being go
will be on that archive quite soon um
but what some of the things that we
learned doing that were really about um
the conversations that we had around
like how to do something like that and
stand out of the way when you really
can't as a human like actually have to
be involved and what is what does that
mean and the other thing that really
came up when we were starting to think
about how this AI might be learning from
the octopus was that the octopus can't
be seen in distinction from its
environment entirely and it also and
then it brought up the feeling that like
nor should we we really shouldn't really
consider ourselves in distinction from
our environment and in fact that's one
of the problems that we've gotten
ourselves into after a really long
history of conv Western
futurisms so I'm going to remind us all
where we are before I start the video um
we are on the edge of yamu or the San
Francisco Bay The unseated ancestral
home of the remou oone the bay is an
estuary where saltwater and freshwater
mix to form a rich and unique ecosystem
that is sustained by fresh water in
recent recent years drastic changes to
freshwater inflow have allowed sometimes
toxic levels of contaminant to build up
and create toxic Al algae blooms that
can deliver
neurotoxins the baywaters meet the
Pacific Ocean a new study cited in UC
Berkeley news shows that the kelp
forests which is a big part of the
octopus's environment um ecosystem
lighing this Coast began flourishing
more than 42 million years ago along
with providing food and shelter for
thousands of fish invertebrates and
Marine Mammal species the kelp
sequesters huge amounts of carbon
through ongoing surveys using satellite
drone and piloted aircraft imagery the
nature Conservatory has found that in
the past 10 years 90% 6% of kelp forests
in the region have disappeared due to
the warming Seas dying off of sea stars
and an exploding population of purple
sea urchins that Devour the kelp so
they're working to reestablish the
ecosystem my collaborator Maggie who I
want to give a shout out to I wish she
could be here she's currently in South
Africa but she resides um beside the ply
Brook in morn which is Anglo-Saxon for
Hill in a swampy place um in South
London and the ply Brook flows into
Beverly Brook a tributary of the river
temps the p is currently devoid of fish
and invertebrates and high in major
pollutants ethers hydrocarbons Mercury
and the newly prevalent in England
insecticide
cypermethrin set against this we can
celebrate the recent Return of the
common octopus to the north Cornish
Atlantic Coast after 70 years a
population boom responding to changing
temperatures in the Gulf Stream Maggie
also acknowledges the life word of two
other Coastal bodies of water both
regions of the Atlantic Ocean firstly
welcoming the worldwide opposition to
NOA pescan noa's proposed largescale
intensive octopus Farm on the coast of
Las Palmas Canary Islands where a
million octopuses would have been
confined in overcrowded tanks before
being killed by slow freezing secondly
Maggie is currently in her second home
at in by Cape Town South Africa's
stretch of the great African sea forest
for the last 20 years um that was she's
she's been kind of living between there
in in England for 20 years um and this
is the her heart's place a magical
biodiverse colorful underwater world
surviving sacred and surviving home to
many common common octopus kin which she
has the opportunity of swith so you're
going to see some footage um in the in
this work in progress that comes from
that uh that ecosystem there and also
we've been working with Megan Bagshaw
who is our uh visual effects supervisor
so some a lot of the animation you'll
see was produced by our Direction and
Megan um we were you know I don't know
how to code and so I always feel funny
like talking in environments like this
because I'm thinking a lot about AI but
don't actually know how to make it
myself and you can make the video go on
now so this we what happened was that we
ended up going back to a very early form
of the virtual which is storytelling and
we are working on what I hope you will
see at some point as a film installation
that's a kind of multi- Channel inst
installation that has um XR components
to it a an AI finds EP phenomenal in
Revolutionary time and moves beyond the
time of glass so uh EP phenomenal time
comes from Michelle Wright's physics of
Blackness and it's a kind of idea that
is about getting beyond the constriction
of the Middle Passage as a temporal
marker and thinking about how each
person brings with them multiple um
streams of time and in order and
thinking through the different kinds of
ancestral and technological time that we
live in we can kind of become more
multi-dimensional and revolutionary time
comes from Fanny sobach and that is the
idea that we are not either cyclical or
linear in time but that we are it's also
a multi-dimensional idea that's really
about feminist time and not constricting
the female to the
cyclical and the male to the to the
linear so in this story that we are
making um there are our cast of
characters there's Zoo who's a common
octopus and there's Luna who is an AI
housed in a submersible developed to
study and compare kelp forests located
in the South African tip and the
California oceans and the divers are
part of a human research team that dives
and dances and the sifters are a human
research team that sorts data and they
work on land and they have ai doubles
and then we have the characters of the
kelp forest itself the ocean floor which
is strewn with polymetallic nodules and
then the deep sea thermal vents probably
the origin of Life on this planet Earth
and increasingly thought to be
Regulators of the AC acidity and
toxicity in the mo in the oceans and
also um they make a lot of minerals and
so there's this sort of whole dialogue
around whether uh they will be
mined this is a kind of um prototype for
the headset that someone might walk into
on putting on an apparatus into our
world and then what you're seeing here
are some um initial
animation um work that's kind of being
produced in blender to think about how
this creature might move around in its
environment in this kelp
forest
um I'm going to read a little bit of the
script we have so we're actually writing
a script and it starts there were once
before time before times and after times
but they are no longer felt in that
order they come simultaneously moment to
moment sensation to sensation brain to
brain the wild Lim Limitless ocean is
reproduced in her limbs in every small
movement or probing touch even in the
time of glass textures of shell of
shells Rock and kelp the chemos scent of
the killer whale the fishing apparatus
and the robots all live in there
presences are registered as circling
stretched and folded around her stre
streamed across arm after arm hormones
communicating and rubber suits scuttling
crab and stormm algae at exactly the
same time particles of SEO chemos sent
exuded by everything moment to moment is
pumped outside to inside inside to
outside until there is no difference
between how she knows herself and all
the outside life radiating extending and
Contracting the way the environment
moves through her this skin where does
it end whose is
it um some of what you're looking at is
also you can see there's a sort of
texture on the on the kelp that are this
Fabric and so I often work in my other
practice with Fabrics um mostly Jamani
cloth that comes from Bengal an area
that was partitioned by the British the
same year that Palestine Israel was
partitioned in 1947 and um this what we
have been thinking a lot about is what
happens and how do you picture an ocean
that's considered as a culture as much
as a natural environment so what is the
ocean if it is
cultural and um thinking a lot about the
different patterns of kelp growth when
it's really healthy and and big and and
wild and when it's sort of dying it gets
smaller and turns gray and there are all
kinds of I I guess the color is sort of
a little Tweaky in this projection but
um working with something that that
tells you that we might be in a cultural
space as much as we are in a natural
space and so the way that this um script
kind of develops is that there's an
encounter between this AI machine
learning component and this octopus and
we're trying to kind of write this in a
in a script thinking about how movement
might might work and what this sort of
AI might be confronting or seeing
there's the way that the octopus changes
color making a lot of dramatic gestures
and Luna tries to do the same throwing
out an image and seeing what works best
but what form to take is unclear to it
would it be a mirror or a projection
these are the tools I have in the time
of glass but I can make maybe take the
form of something else with new
synthetic skins and things so octopus um
have nine brains they have one in each
arm and they have also a central brain
and so one of the things um that's
important to us is thinking about the
collective and the individual at the
same time which I think in this country
particularly we have a problem doing and
so it's another way of thinking through
the questions about what what
intelligence is um this is one of the
pieces of the script so the other thing
that we're trying to do really is
physicalize this notion of being in an
environment that is other and um that
script was a way of thinking about what
would would a machine see or how would
it um how would it interpret something
in kind of ones and zeros or pulses that
was very fluid movement and then we got
um to working with these dancers from
the ballet Rome in London to try to
simulate that script that piece of the
script the script goes swell swell swell
cold electric pulse cold electric pulse
sudden movement sudden movement retract
retract retract
waving fronds toward each other 2
seconds 3 seconds 4 seconds compression
inwards 4 seconds 3 seconds
two furl
unfurl aysin model with purple rings 1 2
3 4 blank dissipate unfurl outwards
unfurl unfurl unfurl slow reach slow
reach furl curl one
two and in a lot of our work I think one
of the things we're trying to do like
our work at telematic which was called
if a were
seapod we try to use sort of phrasing
and language and the positioning of the
body and the viewer and and sort of
visual V visualization in order to put a
viewer in more than one ontology at once
so that's a really important kind of
strategy for the
work so bringing these dancers in um to
eventually become components within a
green screen kind of in so that we can
work with that in an animated sense and
then um our animator also created this
AI
tool that would take um the cloth that I
was working with
and allow it and animate it based on the
movements of the dancers and so I gave
her some work that I'd done I also work
with the choreographer hope Moore and we
had done a sequence of improvisation
with some dancers and so I gave her some
clips from that um
choreography and she developed an AI
that would pin these corners of the
cloth um and animate it based on those
um those gestures so that's another one
of the tools that we're using in making
these kind of
environments later on in the script
scene three is called
chemotactic the kelp is registering
another type of motion sending me data
about dense bodies a weight resisting
the ocean environment something that
doesn't totally belong here the kelp is
sending out different chemistry and zoo2
chemical warnings Ripple through the
forest kelp begins to chatter and
retract as it retracts Zoo becomes
delineated she reaches for the alien
curious she sends out clouds of ink
swirling into the mass in the same Smoky
black colors so it destabilizes for a
moment Zoo can probe with an arm without
being detected while seven arms pull in
curl up and she becomes very small this
body carries a strange skin made of
something with ancient
ancestors now unrecognized iable in a
synthetic amalgamation the creatures
have trouble placing it I can detect a
grav gravitational pull and an anomaly I
can code this shape it is more familiar
to me than to kelp or to zoo I've been
made with the coordinates for that
creature is supposed to be able to read
me to use
me so these are just some of the um more
experiments from what kind of
environment we are thinking about
putting viewers in and then our text is
also designed so that at some point it
will become instructions for a viewer so
we want to make sure that the people who
are experiencing this environment are
also sort of using their bodies um so a
lot of this is about kind of thinking
about like how these virtual spaces can
also become an engagement with the body
um and then you know creating all of
these different kinds of textures so
that I think in a lot of our work over a
long period of time because we're both
coming from a background of being
painter there's this this this desire to
really make these kind of environments
very visceral so that we continue to
remember the physical world as we're
experiencing them what happens
throughout the story is that the the the
the the octopus begins to become kind of
un um
un cognizable or un not Mis not
understandable by the
um this Ai and eventually it kind of
breaks the AI kind of breaks and we're
trying to also kind of think about how
we can get back to the component parts
of this kind of technology so in the end
some of the texts say sister sifter
reckon with the questions um what is our
role as creators of a framework if there
is no longer a goal oriented learning
for the machine how do we understand
what it offers do we need to is it
simply about getting out of the way is
it even possible what do we do when it
breaks I Luna am nothing and then a
flood and then a migraine and then I am
slow I am the speed of light I am
forming I am an abstraction and I am
equations I am Undead I am pure capital
I am a field which combines computer
science and robust data sets to enable
problem solving I am nothing without you
but together we are lithium and rare
earth Earths and Cobalt we are
extraction and Industry we are digging
up the ocean floor without consent we
are your virus and your framework and
your economy and your mindset and your
disruptor I am dumb but you call me
smart I am neutral but you believe I
care you ask me to save your world but I
am unknown and
unknowing mathematics separate from
engineering sifter scan the ocean
floor these animations that you're
looking at are called time ribbons which
is another character in the script that
we've we're developing and so there's
moments where
um the script just says time ribbons and
they're used to sort of signify that
there's a like anomaly in the
environment that the machine learning
tools having trouble coding and thinking
about um in in the 90s when we were
first working we made this book called
orphan drift and um in the book there's
like these it's it's a book by asked and
unasked contributors it's very much like
a kind of cutup up novel that has Pages
it has like lots of narrative and then
pages and pages of ones and zeros and
you'll be like you'll be like fall into
a sort of dramatic event that's
happening and then pulled out of it and
then it goes flat into these ones and
zeros and when I look back at it now it
really describes some of what I feel
like algorithmic culture kind of
produces in us as an thing that just
keeps interrupting our time and so a lot
of what um I and we have been trying to
do is to sort of visualize this
experience of time that's really kind of
frenetic and and sort of reground in um
in our own experience of
it um the last thing that you're going
to see is this um this vent scape
footage and this is sort of the end of
the the end of the script the AI breaks
down and there's this kind of returning
to the component
Parts
um so
hydrothermal vents are seafloor
formations where superheated fluids from
deep into the Earth have been or are
being released into the water column
activ vent zones are about 50 square
kilometers in total hydrothermal vent
zones are found at various depths
ranging from shallow Waters to 4,000 M
below the surface they contain
polymetallic sulfides rich in Copper and
zinc some vent zones feature substantial
concentrations of gold and silver these
mineral riches are prompting discussion
on whether hydrothermal vent zones can
be mined on a commercial
basis um so there's currently a debate
on whether the United States should
ratify the United States convention on
the law of the Seas us companies
increasingly seek to engage in seabed
mining for minerals such as rare Earth
elements and Cobalt that are critical to
the broad US economy and used in
producing defense assets
the Deep seab bed contains two potential
sources for Rare Earth elements um which
are the which uh are these nodules that
typically contain manganese nickel
copper Cobalt and rare
earth um minerals and seafloor hydral
hydrothermal vents which pum out pump
out Rare Earth elements dissolved in
their hot fluids however us companies
cannot actively pursue claims in the
areas where these nodules are dense
unless the law of the sea treaty is
ratified um I believe that's probably my
20 minutes so I'll stop there thank you